Throw here.
Well, not long after that, Coach Stalings came over.
He said, I told you you couldn't throw here.
And I explained that, you know, that my coach said I could train here, the athletic director, and that was the deal I had.
And he said something to the fact that I don't
Didn't say exactly like this probably, but I don't care how many medals you won in the Olympics, you know, you can't do it.
And I said, well, fine.
I'll do it somewhere else.
And I went back, called my dad to the dorm and said, I'm probably going to transfer.
He said, son, that's your business.
That's what my dad always was.
You do whatever you think is best.
I'll support you.
I don't know.
It wasn't those kind of deals.
That's the only time I ever called my dad to complain.
And I just called to tell him because I was going to make, I didn't want him to hear about it some other way.
And didn't really ask him so much what I thought as, you know, here's what's happened.
And he was supportive of that.
And may have transferred except for a man named S.M.
Meeks, who was the equipment manager, had been around A&M a long time.
He came over and said, you know, you need to go talk to Coach Dallings.
And I said, I don't want to talk to Coach Dallings.
He said, yeah, you need to go talk to him.
He said, well, you don't want to talk to me probably.
He took me over to Coach Stalin's office.
Coach Stalin, in his way, said, well, maybe a little hasty, but, you know, athletes, young people ought to have more respect for the elders.
He was about 29 then, I think.
But I said, well, I understand that, except, you know, I was told that I could train.
And I said, I'm interested in being the best I can be.
And if I can't do that here, then I'll do it somewhere else.
And he said, well, we'll...
We will take care of you having a place to throw.
Not only that, we'll make it better.
So they put a portable discus ring in Kyle Field and they put another one out behind.
They put one inside.
But they're practicing out on this other one.
And so I go out there and they're watering down Kyle Field.
and probably wasn't good judgment on my part, but I start throwing the discus.
Well, after all the mess they've had, because in the meantime, it got in the paper that Coach Dolenz is running off an Olympic shot putter from A&M, and even General Ruddard called to check out
how that deal had laid out, so had an interest in it.
So I'm tearing up the football field out there.
And so it became a rub that way.
And so, but we worked, finally worked through all that.
Then they tell me, I had a key to the weight room, because I worked out two and a half, three hours a day, and I worked out every Saturday morning.
Saturday morning, those days at A&M was like a deserted place.
And I'm like, sometimes I'm the only one on campus, I think, you know, and I go over in the basement.
Actually, my first weight room at A&M, this shows you why, you know, what I was willing to do versus what would be a Southern Cal.
Mr. Mammaliga borrowed
borrowed without checking out an Olympic weight set from P.E.
and they put it in the dressing room of the track team.
first Olympic set athletics had, and I worked out with the towels and the dirty socks and everything, but I was happy to do that.
Until later, they built a weight room in the bottom of DeWare.
I say built, it was pretty hot, but it wasn't air conditioned and it was pretty grungy down there in the basement.
But because University of Texas had one and it helped in recruiting, so they put a bunch of weights in there and machines.
And so I was working out in there.
And then Coach Dollins said no athlete can be in there without a coach.
So I said, Coach Thomas, are you going to be over here for three hours?
three or four days a week and Saturday mornings, you know, a couple hours, sometimes more because Saturday I don't have classes or anything.
I don't really get in there and work out.
Well, he didn't like the sound of that.
So, but then I got a message I was supposed to turn in my key.
And so I sent word back, I'm going to turn it in, but I'm going to have John Lindsay and Jack Knox there and turn in my key, tell them that I can't compete.
I can't be as good as I could be because I can't work out a regular place, and I was told that was probably going to happen to me.
Well, that was the end.
The key deal never came up again.
Mr. Meeks, I think, probably took care of that again.
So I had a couple of little battles like that through the early years, and it was a transition time for A&M and athletics in those days, and I guess if I feel bad about...
anything.
It was the discomfort of all that that I had to go through and I probably didn't do it as well as I could.
But generally most people were supportive of me and what I was trying to do because I wasn't asking for a lot of things that I probably shouldn't have.
What was your, do you remember your first meet as an Aggie competitor?
Yes.
Where?
It was in my first track meet was New York City indoor meet.
And I flew up there.
They invited the five best shot putters in the country in Madison Square Garden.
And you're a freshman.
And I'm a freshman.
And the only reason they invited me because as a freshman I'd thrown 60 feet, but I wasn't as good as those, and I finished dead last.
But I threw.
59 feet, which was better than a Southwest Conference record.
And I remember I came back and one of my friends, a long time friend, Jim Sebastian, who was a half miler,
And he said, dang, Matson, we've already ruined you.
You finished dead last.
You'll come at A&M.
And I said, well, you mean I broke the Southwest?
Yeah, but you finished dead last.
And so he denies saying that, but I remember that.
I said, boy, they got high expectations of you around here.
I went to L.A., did the same thing, same group, threw around 60 feet.
But shortly after that I threw 62 feet against Danny Roberts, who I had a lot of admiration and respect for, and after that he never beat me.
Before you went to New York, was that your first full indoor meet?
That was the first time any, well actually it was not, one time in high school they had me throwing Lubbock at the Red Raider Relays and I threw about 53 feet.
That was my, I guess that was probably my junior year in high school or something.
What was that trip to New York like?
Well it was, it was,
scary for me to go.
I've been to New York right after I graduated from high school.
I qualified to go to compete against the Russians and over there.
Actually I didn't, I finished third and they were taking two but O'Brien only wanted to throw in the Russian meat and not the rest of the European tour so they took me.
And so I got, that was a tremendous experience for me because
I got to meet a coach that helped me out a great deal later on who was also a shot put coach in 64 and a head coach in 68, Peyton Jordan from Stanford, and we were still close friends.
And he kind of took me under his wing then.
So you went to Europe that summer?
So I went to Europe right after my senior year.
I gained some experience then that was invaluable because then I was a veteran.
From the time I got to A&M I had competed against the best European throwers and the best American throwers and had been competitive.
But going to New York was a real first real indoor meet and I had trouble with indoor shot and I was on my own, went by myself, had to get to the place.
And this is something that people will have a hard time understanding today.
But when I got there, they said, we've got you in a room at the hotel right across from the old Madison Square Garden.
Nice hotel.
We've got you in a room with one of your teammates.
And I said, well, none of my teammates are here.
I'm the only one.
Well, it's from Texas.
So I went up to the room and went in.
And there wasn't anybody there, but the bags were there.
it was a high jumper from Texas Southern which was all black school.
And I went back down the stairs and I said look I can't do that because I'm from Texas in 1963 that that's just something you wouldn't do.
And I had never
run across that before, but I knew what had been expected of me.
They said, we don't understand what you're saying.
I said, well, he's black and I'm white and you can't do that in Texas.
Well, we don't have any other rooms.
I said, then I'm going home.
And I was headed for the door and they stopped me and they put me in the bridal suite.
And if that would have gotten, even then, public knowledge, it probably would have hurt me some.
Not back in Texas, it wouldn't.
But what was interesting, two years later, I'm traveling all over Europe with Ralph Boston, a black long jumper from Tennessee that was a great Olympian and a great friend and someone I love seeing right now.
We're traveling all over Europe, rooming together, and I think nothing about it.
From that point of view, you know, track and field changed a lot for me that way.
It exposed me to a lot.
But in 1963, when I got up there, that would have been an unacceptable thing to do.
It's amazing how things have changed over the years.
Did you see any, on that first trip to New York City, did you see anything that stunned you or shocked you about big time track and big crowds and so forth?
All, you know, I was so intent in competing, I don't think I paid much attention to that.
It was a big crowd in Madison Square Garden, but said I'd already been to Europe,
50,000 in Germany and chanting and came down out of the stands and it took us an hour to get out of the stadium.
We had a good track team.
We had Bob Hayes and some guys like that over there and so in Europe I found out it was tracks a lot different than it was in this country.
Were big time, as far as you knew, were big world class track athletes drinking or
Well, that was before anyone knew about, at least in this country, because the first time steroids came into play in track and field, or before then there was something,
little talk about amphetamines or something to pet pills or something but as far as steroids the first time I ever heard of steroids was 1964 when we're at the Olympic trials and they were talking about the Russians and these Germans are taking something and Americans experimented was starting to because it was not illegal then it was it was not banned there was and no one knew much about it to the point where I got some of them came home and
and looked into doing it, and I went to a doctor here at one of them.
and I'm sure it was Dr. McQuaid, who was the athletic doctor in those days.
And he pulled out and read the brochure that went with it and looked at me and said, well, you know, there's a potential of affecting your glands that normally produce those drugs.
And the other thing is, if you have a cancer or something like that, it may feed it.
Well, that's all I need to know, you know.
It wasn't worth that to me.
But other than that it wasn't illegal in those days.
Now what they were doing then, even the Germans and Russians, were so minor, such small amounts and stuff compared to now.
By 1968 it had become a major deal where they even started testing in 68.
That's when they first started testing.
And even though the tests weren't very good then, and a lot of athletes improved real fast because of steroids I think.
In your own routine of what you ate and drank then, what were your guidelines?
Well when I got to A&M I was little so I needed to gain weight so I mean I ate protein tablets and supplements and vitamins and all that and just ate as much as I could.
Nutrition wasn't as big a deal back then.
Diets weren't as big a deal.
Did you drink coffee, a soft drink?
Yeah, I started doing, you know, those kind of things.
Ice cream?
Oh yeah, all that kind of stuff.
And, you know, I was trying to gain weight.
I'd go to meet in California and come back and lose, I lost 7, 8, 10 pounds.
You know, I was having trouble keeping it on.
And, but it, you know,
The diet and business wasn't as important today.
The athletes trained I think hard in different ways.
They didn't, not as many trained all year round.
I was one of the first probably that in this part of the country that trained all year round.
Perry O'Brien did and some of those guys but
Now athletes can do it because they can make a living.
It was a sacrifice in those days.
All right.
That first year, the Olympics, the 64 Olympics held in the summer?
Held in October.
October.
In Tokyo.
All right.
How did your spring track season go that first year?
Well, I had a real good, I was improving every week and it was one of the most fun ones I'd had.
I was kind of a long shot early in the year for the Olympics until I threw 64 feet and one inch.
No, I threw 63-11, I think, down in Houston to meet at Rice, which put me into being one that I had a pretty good shot then.
I was one of four or five that
would be favored to get a spot on the team.
It was going to take about 63 feet, probably, maybe a little bit more to make the team, they figured.
Dallas Long, by then, had thrown 65-7, which was the record.
He'd improved that to 66-3 that summer, and so he was sitting out there with a 66-3, and
and Perry O'Brien was in there about 63 and a half and I had that 63 and Gary Gubner was about 62-11 from New York so then after that it got pretty slim.
So I went to New York to compete, actually New Jersey, to compete in the national AAU meet and Dallas Long was there and was not in good shape.
He'd been sick a little bit and he was in dental school and
and was having a hard time, you know, getting it all together.
And he threw 63 feet and I threw 64.
Won and beat him and O'Brien, both of them.
and then uh i realized i really had that that's when i realized that i not only had a chance but i'd be disappointed if i didn't make the team so that for you was that a important psychological me that was i beat him in the meat even though he wasn't at his best but the other guys were there too and i beat them and it was a competition between me and him instead of them now i still had old brian to deal with because he was
the king of psychology and all that and he was a tough competitor and won a lot of meets on his last throw and there's a kind of mystique about him.
So we go to, they had two trials that year.
Then they had one in Randall's Island, New York and
I'm in third place going into the last round, which puts me in the sixth that they're going to take to the next meet.
They're going to take six longs out there, about 64-11 or something, and O'Brien's at like 63-8, and I threw 63-11 on my last throw to beat O'Brien, which was another milestone.
Even though I didn't throw like I should have,
beating him on my last throw was something that he never get you know he did that to you so and I remember the good feeling I had when he just when he talked to me and just you know stomped out of the stadium I knew I'd arrived then because
He was mad.
So then I go to the duel meet with the Russians, which was a big meet for me because they took two throwers, Long and me, because we finished first and second at the AAU meet in a duel with the Russians.
And that was a milestone too in a different way.
Dallas Long threw 67-10, a new world record.
I threw 62-10, which got beat by five feet.
But not only that, is one of the Russians beat me.
And I was the first American that got beat in a duel meet with the Russians in the shot put.
and I came home and trained like I never had before and I started throwing a lot more and trying to get ready.
We came back to the trials and I threw like 64 something along through 65 and O'Brien got the third spot back about 62, 11 or 63 so it turned out like it was supposed to then O'Brien goes into this real intense training for the Olympics so there's a lot of
Probably they would have guessed that he was probably going to beat me in the Olympics, you know, when I got out there.
And then we went to Tokyo.
I trained in California.
I stayed out there and trained.
Stayed with the team and trained the whole time.
Where?
Well we lived at San Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, a nice spot up there.
We trained down at Mt.
Sag Junior College.
And I threw in some meats out there, all comers meats.
But I was really, all I was doing was eating, lifting weights, and throwing.
And by the time we got, I was in really good shape the time I got to Tokyo.
And I'm training at about 63 or 4 feet, which is good for me.
Peyton McKnight's the coach.
Wait, wait, wait.
Peyton McKnight is the shot put coach.
Peyton McKnight?
Excuse me.
Not Peyton McKnight, that's the old Regent.
Yeah, yeah, that's why.
Peyton Jordan.
Yeah, yeah.
I'm sorry, your own name.
P-E-Y-T-O-N.
Mm-hmm.
And he's the, and we're out there training.
I'm throwing about 64 feet in practice.
It was a really good practice throw.
I wasn't a good practice.
I usually threw better meets, which I'm thankful for.
And he says, you can win this thing.
I said, well, they're not.
It was long.
He said, you can win this thing.
It was a fleeting thought but it didn't stick with me very much, you know.
He was a great champion, had never won a gold medal and if he won one he'd probably be the last of his career because he was about to get out of dental school and start a practice.
But after the first round, I'm, and I mean they got these 300 pound East Germans and you know they look different than they did the last time I saw them.
The Russian is big and the Hungarian is
300 pounds and I mean I'm really intimidated a little bit by it all.
And after the first round I'm in about fifth place with like 60 feet.
Then I moved in the second round I moved into third.
Well I got a medal.
And Long and O'Brien and Varhew, the Hungarians enemy.
In the third round
I moved into second, but it's a shaky second.
In the fourth round, and Long is not throwing well.
He's throwing 64 feet.
I mean, it looks like he's got it one.
He's already, you know.
In the fourth round, I threw 65-5.
a new Olympic record and move into first place.
Long gets in and throws terrible.
For a moment, maybe, you know, it's over for the other guys.
O'Brien can't throw that far.
Roddy, you can't throw that.
I can't throw that far, you know.
I get in the next throw and I throw 66-3, a new Olympic record.
And Long throws immediately after me.
He doesn't even walk to the front of the ring.
Steps in and throws 66-8 and it's over.
Neither one of us improved on our last throw.
And I remember him telling me, he said, it's all yours now.
That's what he told me on the victory stand, you know.
It's all yours.
Now you finished.
Second.
And you're how old?
I'm 19.
19.
What did you feel like up on that?
I felt good.
You know, even though I didn't win, I felt excited and good and...
I was thrilled by it all.
I felt Long was the best shot putter and probably deserved to win.
I think I probably would have felt like I kind of stole it if I'd have won that one.
So I didn't feel bad at all.
Did any family or special friends go?
No one was there.
for that, you know.
This is Tokyo, October.
And during, as you were preparing for all that spring and summer, in fact, who was coaching you?
Was anybody?
Mostly on my own then.
Coach Thomas was willing to do whatever I needed you know to be done and he was a perfect coach for me but he knew what I wanted to do and he created an environment for me that I'm here to help you tell me I'm not going to try to mess you up you know what you want to do.
Now where were you getting you were reading
things and trying to learn all you could.
Where did you learn?
Yeah but most of it I learned in high school with my high school coach.
Is that right?
We studied film together, Dallas Long, Perry O'Brien, Bill Nieder, over and over and over.
Now, was your technique different from anybody else's?
Not too much.
It was a little different in that I was taller and lankier, but then they went through basically the same technique.
I just wasn't near as strong as the other guys.
And you all didn't spin those days.
That's what I thought.
As you are coming home,
What are you dreaming for the future?
Well, I'm already starting to think about, well, you know, well, two things I wanted.
I really felt like at that point in my career, the most important thing to me then was the world record.
That's what I wanted because that meant I was the best.
Now, over the years, I realized that that's kind of a fleeting thing because somebody's going to beat it.
But a gold medal, they can't take away from you.
So...
You know, at that time I didn't see that.
I would have traded, I would have much rather had a world record than a gold medal at that point in my career.
And what was the record then?
The record was 67-10.
And that was Long?
Dallas Long.
And I'd thrown 66-3 and I'd come back in 65 and with an expectation by a lot of people of breaking the record.
So then I had some pressure on me.
Now, didn't you tell me once upon a time that back in high school you went out and kind of worked out on your own by yourself one day, throwing the 16 shot, and one of the assistant coaches or something gave you a little saying you have the capability of being... Well, that was what I was talking about earlier when my high school coach said, when I threw 55 with it, that you could go to the Olympics someday if you work at it.
Yeah.
And didn't you also tell me that one time you went into, when you were in eighth grade or ninth grade, went into the veteran basketball coach's office and here were the photos on the wall of the outstanding players and he said something to you, if you do your best you might be... I don't remember him saying anything to me, but I remember those photographs.
And I looked at them every day when I was a sophomore and junior because you had the All-State players and you looked at the All-State teams as you walked out on the floor.
And one of the first things I did when I had
went back for the first time after being at A&M, is to go back and look at those and they'd taken them down.
The new football coach had decided it wasn't a thing to do.
But I walked and I looked at Gary Griffin who lives here in town, E.J.
McIlvain who lived here a while, worked at ANCO, both of them.
Those athletes were my heroes in walking out on that floor.
It's just something at Pampa that you did.
You looked at those every time.
Am I correct then in guessing that one of the keys for you was setting a goal and working to achieve it?
Well, that's what I liked about the shot put and the discus too.
The shot put is a little easier to set short-term goals and reach them.
I try not to set real long-term ones.
just throw further and just keep moving it out and staying hungry doing that.
And I was pretty much able to do that.
Every day in practice I had a goal to try to accomplish, even though I never threw as far in practice, which I'm kind of thankful for.
I'd hate to throw my best throw in practice.
But every day I'd go out and work at trying to throw further and never meet.
If I had to do it over again, I probably would have
not push myself at each meet.
I would have said, in other words, this early in the season, I'm going to just do a lot of training and not worry about distance.
But after I came back from Tokyo, there was an expectation everywhere I went to throw well, and I felt the pressure of that, a little too much probably.
And then as I approached the 70-foot mark, then there was a lot of pressure.
You had to drop out of school that fall.
Where did you live after the Olympics?
Did you come back to the campus?
No, I came back and my girlfriend, who's now my wife of all these years, was going to school to Abilene Christian.
And so there was an Aggie there that was going to hire me at one of those good paying jobs I never could have.
He was in the oil business.
And when Coach Fullberg found out, he nixed it because he said you get your fingers cut off or something working in the oil field.
So I went to work for West Texas Utilities traveling around with a legendary
a football official by the name of Curly Hayes, who was a great football, basketball official.
And I said, well, what is my job?
And he said, well, you'll find out.
And I thought, well, this is going to be a cush deal riding around.
And he was a great public speaker.
And he did it all off the cuff.
And we'd go to all these towns.
West Texas Utilities was the largest utility company in the world, in the area.
But they had all these small towns like Anson, Texas, and Big Lake.
Abilene's the only big town in their market, I guess.
And he would go out and talk at the Chamber of Commerce banquets and the FFA, FHA and all that, and I kind of rode with him.
I was getting a salary of $100 a week, which is a pretty good deal.
Ours were kind of long because I was riding with him, you know.
Then I started driving.
And one day we drove up to a place there in Anson, the Lions Club at noon, and he said, he called me Jolly Green because he officiated some Pampa games and we wore green, and he called me Jolly Green Giant.
He said, it's your turn.
I said, what do you mean?
I don't have anything.
He said, you don't need anything.
You just get up and tell stories.
I said, I can't get up and talk.
I'm scared to death.
He said, well, you're going to because we're going to go in there and I'm going to introduce you.
And he had me doing before I was three, three or four of those things a day.
I hated them.
I'm mad at him about it.
It was the best thing that ever happened to me.
I never have liked public speaking.
But I got where if I could get up and just talk and not try to make a formal speech, I could get through it.
And in my job, later years, that was one of the criteria that I had to do.
And it helped me out.
And he helped me.
had a whole lot and encouraged me, didn't critique me much, just encouraged me and so it turned out to be a positive experience.
My girlfriend then and I didn't date much and that didn't work out and later did because we married but
So I came on back to A&M ready to go.
All right.
This special young lady, is she from Pampa?
From Pampa.
She was from my high school.
All right.
And so you had known her?
I had known her.
We didn't date in high school.
She's a year ahead of me.
When did you all start dating?
And we started dating when I was a freshman at A&M.
Oh, okay.
She came to an indoor track meet in Fort Worth and came by and said hello to me afterwards.
And then she was going to be in Odessa when we were at the West Texas Relays.
Uh-huh.
And this is a kind of interesting story.
There's an Aggie out there.
They wanted me to come out.
The Aggies, this was all legal in those days.
They wanted me to come out early and talk to a guy named Ross Montgomery, who was a great running back at Midland High School.
about coming to A&M.
He also was a shot putter.
That's why they wanted me to do it.
And they want me to throw the shot exhibition because I'm a freshman.
I can't throw with the varsity.
They won't let me.
So they have an exhibition for me to throw.
So I fly out there and we go to the country club with
and take Montgomery, and he ends up going to TCU and becoming a great professional football player and went to TCU.
I didn't do very well, but there was an Aggie out there named Andrew Elliott, oil business, stayed with him, and I said, you know, well, this girl's coming to Odessa, and we were staying in Midland, and he said, well, take my wife's car.
I said, well, I'd be uncomfortable doing that, and she's going to come pick me up or something, I think.
He said, no, just take her car, you know.
Well, it was a Cadillac.